---
layout: post
title: "How to make an easy transition from PowerPoint to reveal.js"
description: "The post describes a framework for generation of ABAQUS finite element mesh from experimental EBSD maps using MTEX toolbox in MATLAB."
modified: 2016-08-26
tags: [reveal.js]
mathjax: false
long: true
share: false
---

About a year ago, I saw reveal.js for the first time and immediately fell in love with it. It's actually hard not to fell in love when you look at the sample slides: pretty colors, transitions, and appealing functions. So I decided that I will definitely do my next presentation in reveal.js. Well, it didn't quite happen until very recently. There were a couple of reasons for that

- reveal.js is great and easy to use when you have a few bullet points or a single picture/table/code snippet per slide under a short heading. Arranging more than one element becomes a serious pain in the neck, at least to me, a beginner in JavaScript.  Yet worse, more often than not,  I have tons of images and text labels in my slides, whose arrangement using JS code is simply impractical.
- Presentation deadlines tend to approach surprisingly fast so that days before the presentation, when I'm supposed to practice my speech, I might find myself sneaking some final calculations. In such rushy situations, having to work on slides in a new and more demanding environment (instead of good old PowerPoint) is nothing but an additional burden. On top of that, I rarely make slides from a scratch, some (e.g. introductory) slides migrate from presentation to presentation.

With these challenges and restrictions, I put using reveal.js on hold for better times ...until I thought

> why not export PPT slides as images and use them as a background for reveal.js slides!

Accomplishing this is pretty easy:

1. Open your PPT file, go to *File* -- *Save as* and select an image format, e.g. PNG or JPG.

2. Now use these images as background for each slide in reveal.js

Here is an example of code in reveal.js that would result in a slide with an exported PPT slide as a background image.

{% highlight JavaScript %}
<section data-background="path/to/slides/Slide01.png" data-background-size="contain">
</section>
{% endhighlight %}

## Automate with a Python script

Ok, but what if you have hundreds of slides? It's no fun to copy-paste these JS lines for each of them. To automate the process, I came up with a Python script to automatically write the necessary reveal.js lines to a markdown file for every png file in the folder containing exported PPT slides.

To use the script, specify the right paths, file extension and then copy-paste the contents of the output _slides.md file to your reveal.js file.

{% highlight Python %}

import glob
import os
import re

dirName = '/path/to/folder/containing/ppt/slides'
prefix = 'Slide' # default for PowerPoint
ext = '.png'

outFileName = '_slides.md'

os.chdir(dirName)

# find and sort the files
files2search = '*' + ext
slides = glob.glob(files2search)
slides.sort()

path = '/path/to/folder/where/you/will/store/the/files'

# just in case you want to add any other reveal.js keywords in section definition
jstext = ''

# loop through the PPT files
for i,fn in enumerate(slides):

    fn, ext = os.path.splitext(fn)
    jstext += '\n<section data-background="%s%s%02d%s" data-background-size="contain">\n</section>\n' % (path,prefix,i+1,ext)

with open (outFileName, 'w') as outFile:
    outFile.write(jstext)

{% endhighlight %}

## Go pro with svg

So far so good,

# So what?

By converting PPT slides into a reveal.js presentation, you can immediately enjoy the power of reveal.js

- Put your slides online and
  - access from anywhere using only a browser
  - share slides with a single link
  - share the link with your audience and let them follow the slides from mobile phones during your talk
  - embed slides on your website/blog
- choose reveal.js transitions

That's cool but still some of the readers may say 'meh, that's too much work and I can already do that with slideshare/dropbox or a simple pdf'. So why bother, indeed?

The true value having the presentation in reveal.js is that as we have the bulk of our slides converted we can
